https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

OK, Larry. Let's go ahead now with the rest of your story. And pick up where we stopped with the army service.
Yes, I'm in the army. And like I said before, I created a little bit of a hardcore around myself. And we found out that the
ghetto does not have bread for two days already. And there is no sign. We're not permitted to leave to go out and buy, or
there is no sign of improvement at this point.
So I called in some of my guys. And we sit down and, what can we help? The decision was made that we are going to
see if we can take bread from our soldiers, what we have from our Jewish boys, and deliver to the ghetto.
Somehow, the word got to the general that we are planning to take some bread. The word got to him was like this. We
got up early in the morning. And we packed a wagon full of bread, and we threw hay and straw on top of it, and put
those forks in it, to make it look like we are traveling to deliver hay to another section of the city.
And two guys got on the top and drove out. But one of the sergeants observed it, and saw everything we are doing. So
he went to the general and told him that the Jew boys stole bread and went out with it. He doesn't know where we went
with it. But we stole a wagon of bread.
So he saw me. He called me in. And he says to me, you know, I have a real charge against you. I can arrest you right
now. I should arrest you, he says. You stole a wagon of bread. I says, no, I didn't steal the bread. We took it to the other
section to where our boys are, and they needed hay for the horses. He says, hay, I understand. But since when are the
horses eating bread? And bread in such a big demand now.
Then he says, don't lie to me. Tell me the truth. What did you do with the bread? So I says, well, we took it into the
ghetto. There's some of our people are hungry. We need bread. He said to me, I don't want to hear about it. And he says,
and the next time he says, if you want to do something don't be a dumb Jew and let yourself being caught. I saluted him.
And I said, yes sir. And turned around and walked out.
The next day we already managed, we already found out.
So he was actually sympathetic towards-He was helping. He's trying to help.
That was-And then two days later, again, we went in with one wagon. And then he saw me during the day. And he calls me in,
and says to me, did you make your delivery? I said, yes sir. He says, job well done. And I went away.
But things deteriorated very badly.
Do you have any idea this man's name?
I haven't written down at home, his son, I have the address. I have a letter from his son. I'm in contact with his son. I
have his picture. I have everything.
OK, let's go ahead. And things deteriorated in the city, and out of town. And the Hungarians didn't-- the population
didn't like that we as Jews who have been sitting outside and sleeping outside, and instead of being confined to the
camp. So one day he came in and arrested all of us, and threw us in the ghetto.
Well, they took you out of the service then, and into the ghetto.
And then throw it into the ghetto.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

OK.

We ran away from the ghetto, back to the-- again after three or four days, there was no food. Myself, there is another
guy here. He lives right here in Cleveland. His name is Leonard Fox. He was with me at the time. We ran back in to the
army, took some breads in bags, as much as we could. I remember I had 14 loaves, and I think he had the same amount.
And we were caught by bringing them in. He got beaten up very badly.
They gave him 45 lashes. He passed out. And by the time they got to me, I somehow managed to run away, jumped
over, went away, and I hid myself in the fields. And he didn't see me. But came at night, I didn't know what to do. I
decided I better go back in, in the ghetto. Because if I would be on the street, as the curfew is on the street, the first thing
they'll do is shoot me.
Sure.
So I didn't want to take a chance. I thought my chances of survival are better there. So I went back in, in the ghetto. And
that was my mistake. Without knowing, the next morning, we were all rounded up, put on the train, and away we went
to Auschwitz.
Everybody in the ghetto, or just you who were involved?
Everybody.
The whole ghetto was cleared out?
The entire ghetto was liquidated.
OK. I see.
The entire ghetto was liquidated, put in, in trains, and off we went to Auschwitz.
You went to Auschwitz. Now, all right. Now can you tell me, what were your experiences in Auschwitz? Were you with
your family?
No. I have heard-That's right. You were-- I had forgotten.
I haven't heard anything from my family. I don't know anything what's happening with my hometown.
Right. The only thing we heard is the rumors they have all been taken away. We don't where.
Sure. Do you remember how long this train ride was from the town where the army camp was that ghetto, to
Auschwitz? How long were you on that train?
Well, the ride took us about five days. We used to stop once or maybe twice, and receiving some water. We are not
permitted to get out of it. Just one guy may be jumping out and filling dishes with and passing him water, no food, just
water. No food, whatsoever.
Was this-- were these regular trains? Were these cattle trains? What kind of trains?
No. It was-- let me explain. It was a train with cattle wagons. In other words, they were like boarded in all around.
But it wasn't the passenger trains?
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

No, no passenger trains. No, no, no. It was commercial.
They were freight cars.
Freight cars.
Freight cars.

Absolutely, freight cars like you pushed in, 80 to 100 people in one sitting one on top on the other one. They came the
families. They let the families be together. But since I had no family, nobody with me, so we so to speak, the whole
hardcore guys were together again, half of it anyhow. And we went, stick together, and we went. That's the way we
arrived to Auschwitz.
OK.
The screams, the cries, the pushing, the shoving in the train those five days, I don't know if there is any human being can
describe them.
Terrible.
The cry from the kids, the smell from older people and from young children. And you name it. And it's hard. I don't
think there is anything to describe it, just to say it's terrible is not a word. I don't think there is a word in the dictionary
that would fit the description.
What was your experience in Auschwitz?
Now, we are arriving to Auschwitz. And there, the minute the train pulled in and stopped, it's like there would be a
complete new world. Like you would fall to the bottom, will fall out of everything, screams, the doors opened.
Do you recall the date?
The date it was, two days before, Shavuot. Let's see. That would be-In May.
That would be in around the 26th of May, 1943.
This was when you were taken from the ghetto and put in. And within that five day period are your arrival in
Auschwitz.
Yes, right.
OK. Describe your arrival in the camp.
In the camp, like I said before, like it's a new plant. They opened up the doors, the screaming, raus! The barking of the
dogs, and jumping the dogs, the SS holding back, they jump-- the dog from jumping on anybody. And those big sticks
and black uniforms with a Totenkopf, the death hats on their-- it is impossible to describe. And the screamings, and the
pushing, and the shoving, raus! Eintreten, raus, eintreten, which means out. In line, out, get in line, out, get in line.
That's all.
And then kids lost-- babies lost their mothers. Mothers lost their husbands, and fathers lost their children, and
screaming. Everybody looking for everybody. And the dogs barking. Finally everybody found everybody, got in line.
Now, we are walking. They separate men on one side, women and children on the other side. Nobody in his wildest
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

dreams would ever imagined that this is the last time that they will see each other.
Sure.
Now as we got in line, put us in a line, men separated, women separated.
This has to be a terrible feel-- you had no idea what the future held for you.
We don't see nothing. We don't-You're told you're going--

You are so preoccupied with the events at the moment that your mind doesn't even wander away. Your mind is right
here. But of course, it's a question for what is the next moment coming.
When you were put on that train, did you know where you were going? No, no idea. No idea.
OK.
No idea.
And when you stopped and you saw the soldiers, we don't where we are.
You don't know what's going to happen to you from one moment to the next.
We don't know where we are. We don't know what's happening.
The minds-- excuse me-- are so occupied just to be from the moment.
Sure.
Finally, we are in a line, and we start walking. And there we see three SS, all beautiful dressed, fancy clothes, shiny
boots, like a mirror. Later, we find out it was Dr. Mengele. And he's standing there and like this, you walk up. And
you're supposed to tell them your age. You come to him and you say 16, 17, 18, whatever, 50, 20, whatever your age is.
Sure. I came in front of him. I said, 17. [NON-ENGLISH] 17. He looked at me and makes like this, means I'm going to
the right. Other guys, to the right, to the right, to the right. Then he makes like this. It means to the left. We didn't know
the meaning of it, what it means.
Of course not.
Left and what it means to the right. And finally it's over, so to speak, that-Selection.
--selection. We got in. And now we are lined up men, only men, no woman, no children. They are all separated in a
different direction. We are lined up eight in a line, and a whole on the back, a whole line, I don't know how many
thousands. And I'm in the middle. And we are about to walk. From far, I can see there is a big sign through a gate. And
it says, Arbeit macht frei, which means work brings liberty. So to go through that gate, as we are walking towards the
gate, on both sides are barracks.
Are you carrying anything, any possessions?
I just have one-- on my back, I have a sack with-This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

A rucksack, a knapsack.
Yeah, right, a knapsack, with some, a few of my personal belongings, nothing else. And as we are walking, somehow I
had the feeling that somebody is looking at me and that something will happen. I looked around, and I didn't see
nobody. But I saw one SS man, soldier walking with a big stick and with a whip in his hand. And I saw him walking,
more I came closer to him, and closer he came to me, somehow something in me starting to work harder and harder.
And from out of the blue sky-It was fear. It was fear.
No, it was-- I can't describe the feeling, and it was something. No fear, I wasn't afraid of anything in those days.
Sure, you were a young healthy, young man.
It's something-Something's going to happen. Something special-- something is about to happen. And he came over closer to me. And
as soon as he came a few steps away from me, our eyes met, and he had a whip in his hand. And he started to hit me,
saying [NON-ENGLISH].
What does that mean?
It means the damn dark, move, that you further comes away from here, disappear, go, hit me a few times. And I was just
about ready to drop my rucksack, the bag, and just ready to jump on him. When one of my friends in the back, grabbed
me and says don't get crazy. Not now. Another time now. He hold me back and we walked. And this is happening so
fast. And I have to keep on walking in line.
And as I am walking, a thought came to me, why me?
Sure.
Here I am, I'm walking in a line.
With so many.
So many people and that particular feeling after me, if he had come in line, hit this guy, hit that guy.
Yeah, hit this Jew.
So hit me too, so tough luck. But why hit me? And I just turned around automatically, and I was just passing the gate to
going into the camp. It's just from walking I was just about passing the gate, I looked around and I said, no matter what
you SOBs will do to me, I will survive, no matter what. And something overcame me and kept me going through all my
troubles I had for the rest of my life, till this day. It's something in me.
OK.
There's something that I-- I don't know what it is.
Isn't that something?
And that helped me further, you'll see. So here we are. We are in the camp. The first thing we come in, of course, the
hollering, the pushing, the shoving. You know, and all of that. It's undescribable. And then we see this guy. And I say,
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

hey. I am here. I just arrived yesterday, the other day. Guys from different towns.
Where is my sister?

Your sister arrived. She is there. We have seen her last night on the other side of the wire, that kind of stuff.
Right, right.
And here we are.
Did you find any friends?
Oh, yes, I had the group of my-Well, I met other, but not from home yet?
Oh, yes. I'll-- I haven't found anything yet. I'm still in, in my own clothes. Finally, we walk in. We go in to take a
shower. So we're going to bathe, to take a shower, take off everything, and leave it on this side. And they say to us when
you come out, you'll pick it back up. We know damn well that we are not going to come out on this side again, that
everything what we leave here is going to be left.
Sure.
So anyway, we left everything here. We went out on the other side. The only thing we were allowed to take is the shoes.
Everything was left. We went out on the other side. They gave us a shirt, a pair of underwear, and a pair of those prison
clothings.
Yes, right.
And you had your own shoes, snow shoes. Got dressed, they took us out in front of a barrack. That's the first time we
learned the real McCoy, what's-That you're prisoners.
That what we are and what it is. Right away, they gave us a number. They cut our hair, everywhere, everything. They
gave us a number. From now on, 8485.
That was your number.
That's my number. And you don't call you by name. They only call the number 8485. And you say, here. You know, and
all that.
OK.
They bring us, give us everybody, we got a-- I don't know how to call it. We called it a shissel.
A canteen, a little pot.
It's not a canteen.
It's a pot.
Yeah. Yeah, I mean a little tin dish.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

Tin dish.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

So that you-- to eat from. They threw in some stuff in it. Nobody could ever have eaten it. Nobody, nobody.
Terrible.
No taste, no, we threw it away. After three days, he got hungry. He got used to it. And we had to drink it.
Sure.
So, we used to get that stuff once a day. Bitter water, it looked like tea in the morning, nothing with it. In the evening,
we used to get a ration of bread, which is take a pound bread, divided in four, you get one rash, two slices of margarine,
and one slice of slice of jelly. That was our daily-Your daily ration.
--ration. And we had to live on this. So we have been sitting outside. We didn't know what's going on what. Second day,
somebody says to me that in the next barrack there are boys from my hometown. I went to see them. And sure enough,
there were boys from my hometown. And they all say, Larry. Your dad left yesterday.
Where did he leave to? A transport went to Warsaw. And he is in Warsaw. This is already after the liquidation of the
ghetto. It's already 1944. And this is after the liquidation of the-Of the Warsaw.
The Warsaw-- and in '43, they liquidated the ghetto, and after the liquidation of the ghetto, he was taken to Warsaw.
OK.
I says, who else is there? They says, your uncle was there. And this friend, and this friend, and his father, and all of that.
All right. I don't know anything. They are going to Warsaw.
The next day, they pass us by, no nothing happens.
You're not doing anything. You have no routine yet?
No, nothing.
You're just sitting around.
Sitting around, and you know, nothing, talking what's going to be, where do we go. And in the meantime, we have a
smell, we feel a smell. And we don't know what the smell is. Then we learn. They showed us the chimneys. They said,
this is your parents going through the chimney. This is the crematorium there. This is the smell. And we thought, eh. We
didn't believe it.
Couldn't be, nobody could be so inhuman. Yeah.
That's [NON-ENGLISH] who was going to do something like that. But one thing everybody said, get out of Auschwitz
as fast as you can. The third day, I again met another boy. He tells me the same story. My father was here and he left
with the transport. He went to Warsaw.
In the evening, rumors started to spread that tomorrow morning there is a transport going to Warsaw. And it's going to
be from a different block, not where I am, but the other block. So I went over. And I found somebody who had a friend
in the other block. Names didn't mean anything. Numbers didn't mean anything. It's just the numbers, the count. In other
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

words, if you counted 50 people, you had to have 50 people. That's all what counted. The rest didn't mean anything.
So we changed He came over here, and I went over there. And to make the long story short, the next day, sure enough,
got up in the morning to appell. Eintreten, and, so a day later, 24 hours later, I was in Warsaw. And sure enough, there
was my father.
Why were they sending you to Warsaw?
To the same place, to work where those, the transport from my father before.
Oh, I see. Oh, so they sent you to a work place, to work there.
Yes, to the same working force.
I see. OK, I didn't realize. So all right, so actually then, you left Auschwitz. You really weren't there maybe a week.
Less, one day less than a week.
OK.
One day less than a week.
Then you went to Warsaw. We went on the same transport, and they took us to-- I didn't know. I took a gamble. But he
said, Warsaw, so I said.
Right.
And it turned out, yeah. As soon as I walked in the camp, I already recognized my hometown people.
OK, now what was the name of this camp? Was it a camp?
No, it was not. It was like a camp, but it was in the ghetto where the Warsaw ghetto was on the same place.
I see. But it didn't have a name or anything?
No, nothing. Just-So you saw people from your town.
Just, and I saw people from my hometown. And they all started to say your father is here. Your father is here. So I felt.
How wonderful.
I felt not bad.
Now how long had it been since you had left your family?
I left my family, it was six weeks, I haven't seen and I haven't heard from them.
That's all the time it was from the army to-Right.
From the time you left home, it's only six weeks?
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Yeah.
OK, I just wanted to get a time-Late April, same year, till after Passover.
Right, I understand. OK.
OK. So here I am. And we waited till after we had to stay in line, after we were dismissed. I was with my father and, he
right away he starts crying. And you know, and he says to me the rumors about the kids. And then he says, ah, it's only
rumors. And he says, and on the other hand, I know he says, they're eating well and they're drinking well.
OK.
But I met another boy, who the fact of the matter is he is here in Cleveland too, who is a Polish boy, also in the camp. I
don't know where I am. I only know it's Warsaw. I don't know what it is, where I am, except that Warsaw.
Excuse me for interrupting you. Did your father, when he was there, did he know where his wife and your sisters were?
Yeah, he didn't know anything.
They were in Auschwitz.
They are in Auschwitz. That's all.
OK, that's all he knew.
And he-- yes. And he said-That's where they separated the men from the women.
Right.
OK.
The events were the regular process. And he said that somebody told them in Auschwitz they are going to get bread,
white bread, and they will live yet. I mean live good, and there was no problem.
All right.
And they will survive. It's just a matter of time.
Yeah.
I already knew the truth, but I didn't want it to hamper with him. I didn't want to take away his hopes, and to make them
misery. And I thought to myself, as long as he lives in that world, let him live in it.
Right.
So here again, the things started to go different directions. After being there for three days doing nothing, the fourth day,
and I came out at the weekend, and started out on a Monday morning. We were called out to go to work. Our job was to
clean bricks from the broken buildings and put them together on trains, which in turn took them to the Russian front to
build bunkers for the winter for the German army.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

OK.
Walking through the streets from the job, and from the job I read all kinds of Jewish signatures, Jewish sayings. [NONENGLISH].
What does that mean?
We were betrayed. I was here.
Like graffiti written on walls.
Yeah, on the walls.
OK. All right.
And I saw a street [NON-ENGLISH], and another name of a street. I didn't know. I know that's Warsaw. But I didn't
know-You didn't know that this was the ghetto that had been destroyed.
Right.
OK.
And I saw the big walls, and I didn't know all of that. We didn't understand.
You probably didn't even know there had been a ghetto there.
Right, we didn't know that.
Right.
So after going on like this two weeks, finally we found out, we came in contact with the Polish people there who have
been working, and being paid by the Army for the Germans. They said that this is the section where the ghetto was. And
then one day, we went from a different direction. I passed by a big house. There was a big sign saying Judenrat. So then
I knew that we were there.
So that was like a Jewish council.
Judenrat, that was the Jewish Council, right. Yeah, the headquarters of the Jewish Warsaw ghetto Jewish council.
Right, OK.
So here I am, in my wildest dreams when I have dreamed that here after six months after the liquidation of the Warsaw
ghetto, I'll be in there in the Warsaw ghetto. So we worked there. One day, a German comes over and he says, a guard
comes over and he says, [NON-ENGLISH], which means who knows how to read Yiddish?
So we had a saying. And we had a rule. Never volunteer for anything, and never try to be alone. Try to stay with more
people together. Because whenever anything happens, first the fear is not there. There's a lot of psychology involved
with that. Nobody says nothing. Then he says, [NON-ENGLISH]. There must be somebody be who knows how to read
Jewish. You know?
So finally I said, yes. I raised my hand, and I says, yes. So he comes and takes me away and he says, come out here. He
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

calls me over. I walked with him. So another soldier comes with him, one of the guards. And I said uh-uh. That's it. And
he took his machine gun off from his hand, and we walked. So some of my friends said, that's it.
So he calls me aside, and he takes me in front. There's a bunker like going down to the ground. And it's with red paint to
me. Years later, down to me that wasn't red paint. It was blood. But it looked like dried paint, you know? And you touch
it, it falls off. You know how?
Sure, flakes off.
Right.
And it was written in Jewish, in Yiddish, it was written [NON-ENGLISH]
What does that mean?
In other words, we were betrayed. Remember us. Later on, I found out that was the headquarters of Anielewicz and the
whole gang of the headquarters of the group who fought to the last one.
So you translated that for him.
Yes, and I translated it for him.
So he says to me, what does it mean? So I told him it means we were forgotten, and remember us.
And he took me back there. And it was over. No problem.
OK.
They gave us cigarettes. We had the ration. We had no-- so to speak, besides the pushing around and the hollering in the
usual way, but nothing of the brutality.
Was it all men?
All men, no woman. Nothing of a nature of a brutality.
Were they Germans who were guarding you?
Oh, yes. There were Germans there were Yugoslavs guarding us. There was Polish who was guarding us.
But they were civil to you.
Under the circumstances, I would say, yes, nothing of a cruelty or nothing.
OK.
And the first cruelty I entered was one of my friends developed an infection in one of his ears. And some of the boys
said, don't go nowhere. As long as you have it, stay. Some of them said go to the doctor and let them look at it. He went
to the doctor. He took a chance. The doctor looked at him, and he says, well, you got a bad infection. There is nothing. I
have no medication. There is nothing I can do. Just take an aspirin. He give him an aspirin. But he needed antibiotics.
Well, there's nothing I can do for you. He got a high fever. So the long story to make short, he took him to the hospital.
There was a section that he called a hospital. He said, goodbye. And that's the last time I have ever seen him, the last
time I ever heard of him. Till this day, I don't know what happened to him, how he was killed or what. But he
disappeared. That's it. So that's the first encounter.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Second encounter was a few days later, an SS, a sergeant major, and the rank of sergeant major arrives on a motorbike.
And he says, we are standing outside in the field on the apellplatz. And he says, good morning. [GERMAN], who
speaks German? So several guys raised their hands. I was there too. My father says, no don't go. Don't go. But I already
raised my hand, so I couldn't. So he goes forwards, to come forward.
I came forward. He went to all of them through. He came to me. And he says to me, how old are you? [GERMAN]
I was siebzehn, 17. He says, [NON-ENGLISH]. You'll be OK. You'll do. He says, come with me.
This was 1944?
Yeah. In the beginning of '44. Spring '44. He says, come with me.
So you were really 19.
No, I'm already 18.
OK, whatever.
OK, yes, now I'm 18. All right, he says come with me. That was before my birthday.
All right, fine.
Yeah. Achtzehn, yeah. 18. Come with me. So I went with him. And he takes me to the front. And he says there, he talks
to the sturmführer or something. And then he says, come. And I always, when you were in camp and you talk to
them, you're not putting your hat on. Your hat must be down. So he says, put your hat down. I put my hat down. He
says, sit in the back of my motorbike. So-Were you wearing this still this same uniform?
Sure, I was in uniform all the time, the Auschwitz uniform.
Yeah, the prisoner uniform?
Yes, the uniform. With the number here 845. it's all the time, nothing changed. So he takes me and we go several side
streets. And then he takes me in a building. And the building is bombed out. But it's boarded in from all over. In other
words, you know like the windows. They were all boarded in. And it's a cold feeling to it. It's something, it's like the
shivers and you walk in there.
I walk in. And it's around, a big building surrounded all around, and in the middle it's like a parking space. There are
trucks, cars, half tracks, half tanks, and all of that. And it's bustling with people coming and going. And so he comes,
takes me in one of the sections, takes me up and opens up a door. And it's a big section part of the building. And there
are dogs. There are a dozen dogs. And they're all barking, and they're just if he opens the door, I'm finished, they'll tear
me apart.
And there is one dog walking right behind him. So he says to me in German, he says, look. He shows me. There is a
cage. Between every dog there is an empty cage. There are cages. There's two dogs, but in between them is always an
empty cage. So he says to me like this. You take this. Open up this cage, and open here. This dog goes in here. You
close it back. You clean this out, put back in the food, put in back the clean. You open it up, the dog goes back in.
And you open this-So this was your new job.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Right, it was my job to clean the cages and give the dog the food. And he says, you give the dog the food. But you don't
eat his food. He says, because you're going to have plenty of food. I says, fine. [NON-ENGLISH]. Yeah.
Then he says to me this dog here, you can walk this way till there, there was a line. You can walk till there, if you walk
over the line, there's a red line, the dog will kill you. And you can walk this way till the red line. If you walk over, the
dog will kill you again.
You know what kind of dogs these were?
They were German shepherds, but they were big-Big dogs, big mean dogs.
Very mean.
They were-- some of them were in black, and some of them were-- it was the real McCoys. And he said, if you go this
way, he'll jump you. The only way you can go is this here.
To do your job.
Yeah. And he's going to walk behind you. And he's not going to do anything.
They trained a dog. They didn't need a person.
You can walk around any place you want here, but you cannot go there because you'll jump you, and all that.
You can't cross the line.
The dog came and smelled me a little bit and all that. And so he says, I'll come check with you back in a [NONENGLISH], which means in about an hour.
OK.
He came back in an hour and he looked around. He liked what I saw. But doing the work, I had a funny smell, like a
sweet smell that I smelt in Auschwitz. But I thought, ah, it can't be the same smell. It must be that from the dogs, the
stuff and all that, the food, and the odor and all that. It must be from the dogs.
But somehow, I didn't I had a funny feeling that it's not. Well anyhow-Well, this was on the site of the Warsaw ghetto?
Yeah, inside, where the Warsaw ghetto used to be.
Yeah, right. OK. So I'm doing. He comes back. He looks at the job. He says, job well done. And it's lunch time. He says,
everybody's eating lunch already. He says you come with me. He takes me to the [NON-ENGLISH], to the kitchen
there. And he goes in and he says to the guy in the kitchen, [NON-ENGLISH] big man, give him to eat.
So he comes up and he says, [NON-ENGLISH], do you like noodles? I says, yeah. Oh, so. OK. He brings me out a big
bowl loaded with noodles.
Why were they so good to you?
Me, because I worked there. So for a working man, you know? So I ate the noodles. I couldn't eat up all of that. So I just
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

put in my shirt down here, and you're going to take it to somebody who's hungry.
Took to my father, I throw it in here.

You didn't know what tomorrow was going to be. Then he says to me, stick around for a while. And you help me clean
my [NON-ENGLISH], the big kitchen. And he says, I'll give you some more to eat. I said, fine. I waited. About a half
an hour, the other guy says to him, yeah, [NON-ENGLISH]. The dog was next to me watching me. I cleaned up
everything beautiful. He liked it. He gave me a big canister, like this loaded with chunks of meat and all kind of
macaroni.
And it came around 3 o'clock, he says, come with me. Put me on the bike, and drove me back into the camp. And that
was been going on like this for about three or four weeks. That's what made me survive with my father and all that. You
brought food back.
I had plenty of food. And I gave it to my uncles, and some of my friends. We had plenty of what to eat. I couldn't get rid
of that smell. And I says to my father, I don't understand what's going on. There is a smell. And that taste of the smell
bugged me.
Sure.
It didn't let me. And I know I had smelled it somewhere. One day, I don't know, after being there for a while, somehow
he took the dog away or something happened to the dog. I can't explain how it happened. The dog wasn't present for
quite a while. And I heard some things going on behind one wall. I couldn't figure it out for days I knew that something
is going on. So I thought then the army is coming and going.
Sure.
Curiosity killed the cats. And I wish I had never gone. I wish I had never walked over-Been curious.
I walked over. And there was, they had three cars. In those days, the Germans used to have like they have now, the cars,
the vans, big vans like the parcel post office is carrying, you know?
Sure.
Locked in, no windows, nothing. They had like this, colored in black. And the Germans used to pick up whoever they
were to pick up, the SS. And threw them in, in those wagons, and bring them there.
Meanwhile, your father and the other people in this ghetto were working too.
Yeah, they were working.
They had different jobs.
Yes, they have been cleaning bricks, throwing.
Oh, that's right.
Yeah, they're working on their bricks. And some of them are working in the fields with the farmers. Each one has his
own job, and his own way.
OK.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

And then when I came closer, and there was a split between the boards, put together, there was openings. So I could see.
In the back of this van?
In the back-- in the backyard of that, you see?
Oh, I see. I see. You could see through the wall.
Wall, yeah, through the window. It was boarded up. Between the boards, you could see on the other side.
You peeked through.
Right. And you could see what's there. And there I saw standing the three vans. And on the van naked people, tied their
hands and on their mouth they had those taped up. Taped. They've been standing like in a line. And the smell-On the street.
Standing in the yard.
In the courtyard or whatever.
Yeah, in that yard. Then he took him, picked them up, and put him down like wood, one by one, stacked them. One
here, one here, one here, one here.
They were not living?
Yeah, alive people. They were standing. But their hands were tied in the back.
Well, who picked-- you mean they were picking up bodily.
Two guys picked them up.
With their legs-One grabbed them by the legs and the other like this. There were women, and they were, I don't know if they were old
or young. But I could see the difference between men and women.
Of course.
Yeah, and they put them down stacked them like this. Two this way, and two on top of them. And again, they made it
three, sometimes four.
They lay them down, you mean?
Right, like wood.
Yeah, OK.
They grabbed them. They were tied, their legs and everything was tied. And they were standing.
And their mouths were taped, so there were no sounds.
Right. And they put them down. And another guy came in and threw full of gasoline on top of them.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

You saw this. Oh, how terrible.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

I didn't know what to do. As soon as I saw that, the first reaction came to me, now I know the smell. That's from
Auschwitz, the corpse smell. And I went back. I couldn't move. I couldn't talk. And he came in, and he said what's
[NON-ENGLISH]. He recognized on my face. He said what happened? What's going on?
This is your father?
No, my-- the SS.
Oh, I see.
The SS man came back with a dog.
He saw your shock.
He saw me.
You're in the state of shock.
I didn't know what to answer. So I says, I made like this, and holding my hand. And I says the dog had me [NONENGLISH]. In other words, the dog almost [NON-ENGLISH] me.
OK.
And he took my hand and looked down, and said, [NON-ENGLISH].
Yeah, I says, I took it away in time. He have this inside [NON-ENGLISH]. That's what I got.
Yeah. You didn't want to tell him what you saw.
Right. He says, [NON-ENGLISH]?
What does that mean?
Did you see anything? Did you hear anything? I says, no. Nothing.
OK. So he took me in and came in the camp back, and came to my father. And my father saw me. He says, what's the
matter with you? So I told him. I don't know if they are Jews or who they are. I don't know. And I couldn't eat. I couldn't
sleep. At night, the more I thought about it, the more it started to bother me. And then it dawned on me at night, I says,
my God. Can you imagine the pain those people had to go through by not even taking away from them their most
human thing that even you are not allowed to scream and cry in your own pain.
You can't do this to the worst to an animal. Who are those people? To this day, I don't know who they are, and what
they are. I never knew, probably will never know.
But it went on day after day.
I saw this once. That was happened one time. So I assume it went on, because the smell was constantly there. The smell
was there when I came there the first time.
Did you see them light a flame to this gas? They threw gasoline and threw a match to it. Like, that's it.
OK, so how long were did you stay in this ghetto?
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

And we were standing like this-- and there was all kinds of things, smelling and all of that. And it was going on, it's
already June. It has been going on like this all the way to July. In August we heard some shootings going on and rumors
that the Russians are approaching Warsaw, and that we will be liberated by the Russians.
And at one night, we heard a lot of shooting, a lot of explosions, a lot of stuff. Rumors had it that the Polish
underground tried to break in, in the camp and to liberate us. But they were beaten back and they couldn't make it.
The next day, I had another taste of good stuff. We got up in the morning and we announced that this lager will be
dissolved. And we were going to be-What does that word mean lager?
Lager means camp.
Camp, OK.
That camp will be dissolved.
You're going to be moved again.
And we will be moved from the camp. We are going to Germany.
Oh, OK.
But we didn't know that we were going to walk. We thought that we were going to be taken to transport, you know, and
transport to another camp.
Sure.
We got up in the morning. We stood there from the morning from 4 o'clock till 10:30 at night on the day outside, no
water, no food, nothing, all day long. Then we were told to go back into the barracks. That was already 18 hours you're
standing.
Yeah. So we went back in. We went to sleep. The next day at 4 o'clock in the morning, again out. We were standing
outside again all day, sun is shining. It looked like even heaven came down against us. It was a beautiful day, hot and
muggy, and everything. No water, no nothing. There is collapsing a guy. Here is collapsing a guy. Take him away,
never see him again.
Needless to say, that the shoving and the screaming and the hollering what has been going on is constantly there. The
pushing and the brutalizing reached a point where it doesn't matter anymore with you, because you're already used to it.
So you take it as an everyday occurring. That's the way it is. It doesn't go any other way.
Finally, the third day here we are for two days standing like this outside, without food, without water, tired.
They gave you food when you went into the barrack at night though.
No, no, nothing.
This is three days with no food.
That's the two days without food, without water, or anything. The third day in the morning, we got up at 4 o'clock. We
stand outside again till around 9:00, 9:30 in the morning. Then they bring in. We got in line. Everybody get a Herring, a
salt Herring, a half a bread, two slices of margarine, and two slices of cut of jelly, and a big soup. And of course, being
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

hungry and thirsty and everything.
You eat everything, of course.

Eat everything up. Two hours later, we are on the march. We are starting to go. How everything was figured out, now
the salty Herring after eating, everybody eating everything up, and walking in the heat, starts to work for water. Water,
water, no water. Just keep on walking. Anybody, all of a sudden you hear. Psst. Shot. Anybody stays behind, left
behind, shot. Throw it on a wagon.
Some of them, that's the first days. The first two days, everybody got shot was thrown on a wagon. At night, were
buried. Later on, you didn't even bother to pick him up anymore. You just left him on the street.
So you walked for how many days? Do you remember?
We walked from Warsaw. We walked to a little village called Kutna. It was on the Czechoslovakian and Polish border.
We walked for almost, let's see for about between 8 and 10 days. One day, the fifth day, we reached a river. When we
got to the river, everybody jumped in and drinking water. We had another encounter. They had the Gestapo, not the
Gestapo, but the SS, the guards and the kapos, if a guy were there drinking water, he just went, stepped on his neck.
That's the end.
And stood there as long as he could, let him, till he tell suffocated.
Tell me, how many of you were on this march? Do you have any idea?
Yes, I will come to that. We started out close to 10,000 from Warsaw. We arrived less than 8,000 to Kutna. In Kutna
they brought in again a train.
And this was 10 days later?
Yes.
OK, and the ninth day without water, God opened up the heavens and it started to rain. I was wet, not my skin from the
outside, but already from the inside. Even the heavens were against us. And you can imagine how we have been here
sitting walking and we were tired, in the throes, and by a farmer there in the field outside to rest, we had to lay down in
the mud and all of this, and sitting there for two days, again without food.
Finally, third day in the morning, they gave us some bread and some soup. We had to go. The train came. We had to go
in a train, again, the cattle wagons.
And you don't know where you're going.
Oh, we don't know. We only know that we are by seeing it, we weren't told where we are, just what we could make out
from our own just figuring it out and seeing where we are. We saw the sign saying Kutna. We know that we are in
Kutna, on the border what's what. And being there for about a day, after we were put in, in the wagons. The wagons
were closed. The doors were locked. And away we go. We don't know where we are going.
My gosh, if this is hell, if there is hell on Earth, that sure was hell. We were about 120 pressed into a cattle wagon. And
the clothes, everybody was wet, and it was sticky and muddy outside. And we started the feeling. And at night, they
come in, and with whips and shooting, and hitting, and clubbing. God knows what. It's dark. We can't see. We don't
know.
I got hit with-- I don't even know what it was. In the daytime, I saw the guy he had a tail from a horse dried out. He used
it like a whip. And I got hit with that on the head. And in the morning, we look around there. Is a guy shot. There is a
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

guy beaten to death. There is a guy died.

To make the long story short, by the time we arrived from Kutna to Dachau, which took us all night and a little bit of the
day, from the 8,000 or so left, and from beginning from we arrived 2,000 and some few hundred of us.
Lucky, my father and my uncle, my uncle was beaten on the head. But he was bleeding, but he survived. So we arrived
in Dachau.
Your father survived this?
Yes, we survived. We all came in. But there was others who we knew didn't make it, friends.
And so why do you think that the Germans took you away from that ghetto, because the Russians were coming, and
they didn't want?
Yes, the Russians already prepared their attack against Warsaw. And it was just approaching. And they didn't want us to
be liberated by them.
Sure. They needed you workers. They wanted you to continue working.
Right, so they took us back in. They took us into Dachau. We arrived to Dachau. Dachau was already crowded, because
they started to bring in from outside the people. And the first thing they gave us a shower, to bathe and took away our
clothes. They took away our clothes and give us new clothes. And they gave us a pair of wooden shoes. And they let us
stay. They gave us food, just like for the rest of the prisoners in the camp, once a day water in the morning like tea, and
a soup in the evening, and all of that.
And we stayed there. We had where to sleep, at least like regular barracks and all of that.
All right. Let's take a break again now Larry, and we'll get back to it, to the rest of your experiences in Dachau in a few
minutes.
All right.
Let's wait till the lights go out.

This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

