https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Hi, Larry.
Hi.
I'm Peggy Nathan, National Council of Jewish Women. And I want to thank you so much for your participating in this
tremendously important project. It, of course, will be a permanent oral history for future generations. You, I would like
to introduce as Larry Hersh. And the first thing we'd like to do is to tell you-- to have you give me a brief description of
yourself today.
All right.
Tell me a little bit about yourself.
Like you said, my name is Larry Hersh. I was born in a small town called Chust-- C-H-U-S-T-- in Czechoslovakia,
1925. I'm 59 years old today. I lived there till 19-- till I was taken away in 1942.
Well, tell me now, where do you live now, Larry?
Now, I live in Cleveland Heights, in the state of Ohio, under the address of 2573. I'm married. I have three beautiful
daughters.
How lovely. Are you retired?
Not yet.
I see.
But I'm in the process of retiring.
You're not working right now, though.
No, I can't work. Some of it is part of injuries. I received. And some of it is part of injuries that I brought with myself
from the camps.
I understand. And you said you're married. Does your wife work?
No, my wife is an American girl. And fact of the matter is she's a Cleveland girl. She was born here. And her parents
were born here.
And what about-- you said you have three daughters.
They're all born here in Cleveland. One is in college, going to be a doctor.
How wonderful.
And my second daughter starts college this year. And my third daughter is still in high school.
I see. OK. Now, we're going to really get into your history-To really the point.
--your history, right. Can you tell me what your life was like before the war? Let's begin with about 1939 or so.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

1939.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

You were maybe 24 years old then, is that correct?
In 1939.
No, in '39, you were-- I'm sorry.
No, in '39 I was-You were 14.
--14 years old.
You were born in 1925.
'25, yes.
Yes, OK.
I was 14 years old. I went to school.
And where were you living then?
In Chust, Czechoslovakia then. It still was.
I see, OK.
This still Czechoslovakia. Everything was fine, normal life, and going to cheder, which is the Jewish school where you
learn Hebrew and all of the Jewish rules, laws, and so on.
Sure. Can you tell me what the town of Chust was like?
Yes. There was a population of about between-- there was about 35,000-40,000 population. Between them was about
between 8,000 and 10,000 Jewish people.
That was a large proportion.
Yes it was a nice Jewish-Population.
--community. Yes, a nice Jewish community. There were about a half a dozen temples, synagogues-What big---a Hebrew school.
--city were you near?
Munkács, Kosice. It was somewhere-- it's in the Carpathian Mountains.
I see.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

And it's a section where it bordered not far with Poland, from one side, to Romania, from the other side, and Hungary,
from the other side.
I see.
It was a beautiful, beautiful country.
Can you tell me about your family at that time?
We were-- yes. We were home. I had my grandparents from both sides of my parents, uncles and aunts from both sides
of my parents.
But you all lived together?
In the same-- not-- in the same area, not together.
But not in the same time-No, not in the same-- no.
--home.
No, not in the same home, but in the same area, not too far.
Yeah, I understand.
And also, we had some relatives here in America. From my mother's side, we had-- she had two brothers and two sisters
here. And my father's side, he had one brother in California.
But I want to know about your household in Chust. Am I saying it correctly?
Yeah.
OK.
All right.
You lived with your parents?
I lived with my parents. And later on-Did you have brothers and sisters?
Oh, yes. I had four sisters. And we were five kids. I was the only boy. And now, I have only one sister. Three were
young. And they perished with my parents.
Now, you saw your grandparents often, though, because they lived in the same general area.
Right, right.
How did your family make a living? What did your father do well in those-- just before the war?
My father was a businessman and happened to be well-to-do, better than the most of the Jewish people around. He was
in the wood business, in other words, like sample.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Wood?
Wood, yeah, buying forests and cutting them.
Certainly.
And making-- cutting into certain lumber.
We would call them a lumber yard.
Lumber yard and stuff like that. And he also had a wine cellar-- wine business, which we bought the grapes and made
the wine. And we were, so to speak-- my father was, so to speak, an affluent man in town.
You were-- you would describe yourself as well-to-do or comfortable?
Well-to-do, right, comfortable living. And I always as a kid had everything I wanted. And in those days, especially,
sports things, like having my own football, skiing, skating, and all of that, in those days, it was a big thing, especially in
the part of the country where I was-Sure, skiing, of course.
--and for a kid. And I had all of those things.
How would you describe your family's life?
Well, it is an idealistic life that you can describe only in the most seldom-seen way, let's put it this way. We were all
together every meal. We had-- were together home, especially the dinners. And usually, in our time, the big dinner, the
big meal, was during the dinnertime at-At noon, you mean?
--at noon, yeah. And we went to school. And we used to come home from school at 1 o'clock. And by the time 1
o'clock, we used to sit down and eat, the entire family.
Then you went-- how nice.
And Saturday and the holidays, there's nothing to talk about it, that is unbelievable. It's just like a feast, the family
sitting by the table every Friday night. I used to go with my father to temple, and come home, and have a big meal, and
sing, and go with the religious, so to speak, ceremonies that goes with it, and have the kiddush, the wine. And for
Saturday morning, we used to all get dressed up fancy, was the holiday clothes, so to speak, and go to Temple again in
the morning and come home, have a big meal.
Religion played a big part in your life.
Right. Well, it-- yes, it was not in the sense of fanaticism of the religion, but it was with a sensible religious way.
How about Zionism or other political organizations? Was your family interested or involved in that? Can you remember
back in those years?
Oh, I do remember well. I was very much involved. And my father, he was involved just by being, so to speak,
supporting one organization or the other in terms of money. He did not participate in too many of those meetings and all
of that. But therefore, I already made up for him too.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

You were a member of a Zionist group?

I was a member of the Zionist organization. I was the leader of a Zionist organization, the whole area of Betar.
This was in your teen years?
Right, of Betar. And as I grew older, as we come to it, we will come to it a little bit later on, you will see the whole
operations and so forth that I was involved my entire life.
Did socialism or any other political organizations play a part in your family life?
Socialism not-- well, we knew about it. We talked about it. But my father could not-- he was considered to be a
bourgeois because the fact that he was rich and he was a well-to-do. So he could not be a communist already. Socialism,
that was-- we knew what's going on in Russia. And we know-- we knew that the little success they have with
communism.
We know that in the '30s that the hunger has been going on in Russia and all of that. It-- we knew what's going on in
Germany with Hitler. And we knew what was going on in the world, far as this goes, because of radio and as far as
communication was and wasn't.
You were aware of world things.
We were aware worldwide what's going on. We knew-- for example, we even know what's going on in America, the
Depression. And we had a little bit of a firsthand knowledge of that. In 1933, one of my uncles-- like I said, do you
remember, I said, I have a-- my father had a brother. His brother came to visit, came home to Europe.
From America?
Yeah. And he came home from America for a visit. And one day, he got a telegram. We-- I was a kid. I don't remember
what it was. But a few days afterwards, he packed and he left. Later on, I found out that he had some-- he was in
business. And he had some kind of business difficulties. And he-- they needed his presence because of the
circumstances. And he left. And his mother cried bitterly that he left. And that was the end, probably, that he ever saw
his family.
What was the main language spoken in your home?
In my home-- in the house, the main language that was spoken is Yiddish. We also, all the kids and the entire family,
everybody in the family, from my uncles and grandparents, all the way, we had-- they had at least three different-- know
three different languages. I, in school, learned already a little bit of German. And I knew a little bit of Hebrew already-not in the sense-- there was one thing in the prayers, but the other in the Hebrew. So it was a different. So I knew some.
Yeah, the spoken language.
We spoke Hungarian, Czech, and the local, so to speak, Russian.
OK. Were there many books in your home? Were you-- was your family interested in that?
Yes, we had books. But there was no library in town. But there was a different way of doing things. For example, if a
new book came out, I remember reading Gone with the Wind in four different languages.
Can you imagine?
Thomas-- what was his name, I believe, the president's man-- and Steinbeck, I read those books in three or four different
languages.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Well, where did you get these books?
The style was like this. For example, I had friends. And we knew there is a new book out. So I bought one book. He
bought a different one.
So you would-- you had your own lending library.
Then we switched around between ourselves, and went from hand to hand, and so on, and so on.
Was there a theater or a concert hall in the town?
Yes, there was-- no.
A museum of any kind?
No, no museum, nothing of this nature. But a concert-- we listened-- we didn't pay too much attention-You weren't that.
--to the concert. But we had a movie house. And fact of the matter is we had two movie houses. And we used to go
almost every night to a movie. That was the main entertainment.
Were the movies.
Movies. And then close to the Jewish holidays, like a Purim, or in the wintertime, usually, used to come a-- we used to
call them a troupe, a Jewish group playing Jewish theater. And they stayed for a week or two weeks.
And would entertain.
Right, and then they used to keep going.
Live entertainment.
Right. And then used to go to the next one.
Did your family go on vacations?
Yes, we used to have-- ours was already considered a big town. Like I said, we had 35-40, maybe a few more thousand
people. It was considered to be already a nice town. So we used to go to the countryside almost every summer, around
July, August, something like that, for a month. And to understand how the Carpathian Mountains is one of the most
beautiful part of-- in any country, which you could have there mushrooms and all kind of berries, and swimming, and
fishing, and mineral waters, and mineral baths to be taken. It was just beautiful.
OK. Now, let's talk about you, personally. How do you remember yourself in those days?
Myself, I remember-What did you look like?
I looked-Handsome?
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

I was a young boy who loved swimming, loved playing football, who loved running, bicycling, loved to go steal apples
from the neighbor, steal pears and-An all-around boy.
All-around boy.
Did you have any special interests other than the sports? You mentioned, you love the sports.
Yes, I played soccer almost every team-- we had-- every day. And we had our own team. And we used to play team
against team, and town against town, and so on. It was just everything right.
You have beautiful memories of your childhood.
Tell you the truth, that keep me going. It was everything beautiful. This is till the-- my age of 20 when I was still. I left
the age of 17, I should say, because after this, it's camp and all that. It was nothing. I had everything my heart desired.
How nice.
I did everything I wanted. And it's like somebody put all together a package for me till the age of 17 that everything will
be put together.
Tell me, what kind of schools did you attend?
Like I said, I attend cheder. Then I attended Czech school. I went to Czech-But the cheder is just the religious school? Right.
Regular, right. I went to Czech elementary school. And then I went-- started-- by the time change came, I started to go
to Hungarian. And I went to high school, which was called gymnasium instead of high school.
I understand.
And till around the fourth class, then I had to quit because Jews were not permitted to go to school.
That was-- and so how many years had you gone to school altogether in Europe?
Let's see, I had to-- I started out-- my first year was in 1931. And I went-- I had altogether about nine years of schooling.
Did you have any non-Jewish friends?
Oh, yes, I had many non-Jewish friends. And I also had many non-Jewish enemies, with which I had to conduct it very
often too many fights.
What do you remember about antisemitism in those days of your-- your school days?
In my school days, it had a peculiar sense to it. It was a different-- it wasn't in the sense as antisemitism as it's known
today. It was more of a, so to speak, religious bigotry.
In the sense, for an example, we didn't know-- we could see and feel when, let's say, my Gentile friends went to church
Sunday and what the preacher-- what his sermon was and if it was anti-Jewish or-- in the way they acted, in other
words, in the way-- they used to say that good morning or that good day or how we used to play football in the
afternoon with the kids. Or there was times, for an example, that they will do anything for you, that you would know
any-- no boundaries, no difference whatsoever. Then another time, was Jesus killer, that kind of rotten Jew, and all that
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

kind of thing.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

But I would say, we could live together like this, if it had stayed like this, for another 1,000 years, and nothing would
have happened. And everything would have been going smoothly. And then it gets tough. You have a fight there
between kids.
Well, childhood. Right.
Young childhood, yeah, pranks, and then Jews playing against the Gentiles, and that kind of stuff. But it had no serious
meaning of any kind of consequence.
Well OK. Now, we'll get on to-- all right, these were your teen years. What do you remember about the beginning of
World War II?
World War II-When were you first aware that there was a war?
My beginning of World War two is started out in 1938, when Hitler started in the Sudeten. We already began to feel the
punch in Czechoslovakia. The Germans and the Sudetengebiet, which was called, starting to make trouble in
Czechoslovakia, then creating all kind of confrontations and all of that.
What made you aware that there were things going on?
Well, we knew what's going on in the world scene. We know that Germany occupied Austria. And we knew what's
going on with the Jewish people and Hitler's Germany. And we knew what's going on with the Jewish in Vienna after he
moved in in Austria and so on. And we knew that nothing good will come out of it.
Excuse me.
Yeah. But nobody dreamed that it will go in such a fast pace in the way it went and it will have such a devastating
results as it had.
Were there changes in the way that non-Jews acted toward you and your family then?
At that point in time, we still-- it's-- they are occupying only the Sudeten part. We are still Czechoslovakia. It's-everybody is restless. And nobody knows in what direction. The fact of-- the truth of the matter is that even some of the
Gentiles were afraid. Because they did not know what is awaiting, who is what. And then the major change came, I
remember, and it was in September-Of what year?
--of the month of 1939. No, no that was in 1939 in early spring. Then it came the change-What kind of change?
--of a big scale. Czechoslovakia fall apart.
You mean the government?
Completely. In other words, Czechoslovakia as a country fall apart. The Germans moved in to Prague, occupied the
entire top of Czechoslovakia. Poland took a part by Silesia. The Hungarians took the rest of it. And we, in the
Carpathian Mountains, we became part of Hungary. We were occupied by Hungary.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

I see.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

And then the change was right away.
Well, what changes did your family have to make because of that?
First of all that Czech schools was closed right away. There was no school. Everything was changed from the Czech
language to the Hungarian language.
Well, you were fortunate. You knew the language.
Yes. They didn't bother us. But there were some people who remembered the Hungarians prior to Czechoslovakia. You
got to remember that Czechoslovakia came into existence after the World War I. And prior to that, it was under the
Hungarian Austrian Empire. So some people remember the old Tsar and-- I mean the old king, and Franz Joseph, and all
of that era-- my grandfather. And he had a certain, so to speak, feeling towards that. It didn't feel terrible that this was
happening?
No. It's just change.
Change, right.
And they felt that everything will in time improve. And it's just one of those historical facts. The Czechoslovakia
disappeared as a country, as a Czechoslovakia. And that was that.
But did it-- did that in itself affect your family?
The family as a whole, it did not affect because we were still all home. We were all together. And each one, business as
usual. The fact of the matter is after a little while, my father did command his business with the Hungarians because
they started-- and a year or two later down, until we were taken away from home in 1940 and '41, we have a tremendous
business with them. Because they bought all kinds of materials-- raw materials, wood, fruits, wines, everything. And
they were exporting it to Germany, to the German Army.
They were already-And excellent business.
So this business was good. Of course.
Yes, it was excellent business.
Were you worried about the future? Or you thought things were going to be good?
As time progressed, and as we existed, in other words, in our existence, we felt good. We had everything we needed.
There was nothing missing. Nobody bothered us as on a serious way. We didn't realize that we have been living in a
fool's paradise. Because the world burning around us. And you know how human nature is.
Of course.
So we-- if I have my loaf of bread, that several hundred kilometers away from here, something else is going on, it didn't
bother. And it was something what's far away and is happening. And that's exactly the way it happened with us.
OK. Then eventually, the Nazis entered your town?
No, not yet. Then in 1942-- '41, slowly, laws starting to come out against the Jews.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Right, the Nuremberg laws.
Jews cannot-- these-- that-- the Nuremberg laws were out already quite a while. But they starting to take effect in
Hungary.
I see.
Jews were beaten on the streets.
Well, who-- were there Nazis there doing this?
They are. In the meantime, a Nazi Party was formed already. And they started to make all kinds of propaganda. And in
my area, the major non-Jewish population, they were not involved. They were always only the few who were involved.
And you always will find a few in everywhere that they are willing to sell their soul for-- you know.
Right, right. And they gave in. Laws came out. You couldn't go here. You couldn't go there. And the soldier going
around on a rampage, beating people with a beard, and beating here. They found out where a Jewish family lives, come
at night, and break the windows, and scream, holler, make all kind of-- behaving just like a mob behaves. And we had to
learn how to contend with it. And we did.
But your family made their living in the same way.
Well, the living started to go down. Business started to be badly already. And in fact, then the business was taken away
and given to a non-Jew, who-- some of the Hungarians brought in from deep Hungary, which we didn't even know who
he is and took away our businesses. The only thing what was left is our house and that we could stay there.
So then how long did you stay there? Your family was moved eventually.
Eventually, yes, we were all moved later on. We came to the ghettos.
All right. But so things were getting bad. The business was taken.
Right. The business was taken. And everything starting to go downhill.
Right.
Antisemitism became more a way of life with the local population, with the local people. The young generation, the
young people, friends with whom I used to play soccer yesterday didn't know me today. And it was only one, maybe
two who felt sorry. But they were afraid to do anything. And that was going on not only in the younger generation, but
also, spilled over to the older ones. In other words, for example, my father knew other fathers. And he grew up there
together. Yet-They no longer spoke to each other.
They did, but it didn't mean anything. They-- don't bother me. I can't do it. It was-I see. Nobody took your part. Nobody helped you.
Right. Nobody was-- and in fact, my grandparents lived in a village not far from our hometown, from our town, from
Chust, about 50 or 60 kilometers from there. And that small village, there were maybe 30 or 40 Jewish families. And
there was about 500 or more non-Jews.
They started-- and they grew up there. They lived all their life in that village. Yet they starting already to feel the pinch.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

They wouldn't sell them wood. And they wouldn't sell them products. They would not do this. And the usual thing, they
used to be everything without any change. Nobody was around.
OK. Looking back, and you knew-- you saw what was happening-- do you recall any plans, then, that your family made
to deal with this situation? Or did they feel that they were helpless?
They was-- let me give you a sense to understanding from the Jewish point of view what has been going on.
Well, I want to know, though, about you, yourself, and your family.
Yeah, it was me and my-- it was-- involves me my family.
OK, fine.
But in the way things been going with me and my family will reflect on the entire concept of-Right, and I understand, right.
--existing at that period of time. I was a very good student. And in 1938, in Czechoslovakia, was a school in Prague for
special talented youngsters. I had to go through, I remember, a special test. And I came out with flying colors. They sent
me a questionnaire to fill out what I would like to learn, what sports I would play, and all of that. And they wanted to
pay everything. I had nothing to do, just to go to the school.
Like a scholarship.
Yeah. And I wanted-- at the time, I decided to be an engineer, engineering. I wrote back. They accepted me. They even
sent me home a ticket and exactly how-- directions how to go, where to stand, to arrive, who will wait for me, and what
clothing to bring with me for sports and football, and even an instrument, a musical instrument, to play, and all of that.
My grandmother from my father's side, my father's mother, she went to the rabbi. And she said to the rabbi, this and this
is going to happen. My grandson is going to that kind of school. The rabbi says, gevalt, he's going to be eating treyf.
He's not going to be able to go to temple on Shabbos. And he's not going to be able to put on the tefillin. He's not going
to be able to pray in the morning and the evening.
He discouraged her.
And that kind of-- she came home all fired up against my father and especially against my mother. Because my mother
was a very modern woman. And what are you going? So my father couldn't bear it. He had to cancel it. So in this kind
of environment, in that kind of circumstance, I'm trying to give you the concept of.
Now, we teenagers who were organized in the Zionist movement, we felt something is to happen. But we had no, so to
speak, leadership. And as you will see further, you will understand what I'm talking about. Because it's hard to explain
how the events went. We knew something is about to happen. We tried to organize the younger generation already
together as much as possible.
But everything was closed. We could not move out because we were framed in, boarded in. We were already Hungary.
So we could not go back to Czechoslovakia because there is already trouble. Romanian, all the borders were closed.
And if anybody was caught, he was shipped back.
On the other hand was Germany. Germany was already in Poland. And Germany was already in Czechoslovakia. So
what's left? We couldn't go nowhere. The only place to go was Romania or Yugoslavia. And Yugoslavia, you couldn't
go because Yugoslavia had their own problems at the same time as we had in Hungary.
OK. Let's talk about what happened to you as the war progressed.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

As the war progressed, and made-- everything went. In 1942, I was out of school. I had to leave school. I couldn't do
anything. Food became a problem, scarce. Black market started.
Your father wasn't working.
No, he wasn't. The business was-Everybody was just staying home.
Oh, yes. We all staying home.
Everything was taken away. And you were afraid to move, almost.
Business didn't existed-- nonexistent. A Jew could not do any kind of work. He had no job, no businesses. And then
things starting to go bad. There was a lot of problems in the Jewish community because of the daily needs and for the
daily survival. So to speak, the well-to-do Jews had to open their pockets and do what they can to help others-To help others, right.
--more than in the usual way. And I do remember my father selling all kind of things in order not only for us-- to
support us or the rest of the family, but other people-To help others.
--others who we knew and all of that.
OK. Then they came in. And were you taken away? As a family, were you moved?
Then here comes a little bit of a different-- my life story is a unusual one.
OK. That's what we want.
And my life story is not the every survivor story.
That doesn't matter. We're interested in your story.
My story has a different, as you will see as I keep going.
All right. Let's go on.
1943 is approaching. We had a meeting at the Zionist organization. And there was rumors that for our hometown, there
will be four-- at the time, we called it certificates available to go to Palestine. And this-Who was issuing these?
They used to be issued from the British and from Palestine. And to Hungary used to-- came that Hungary will release-they will be permitted to leave, at the time, if I remember correctly, there was 150 Jews, young people. My hometown
received from the 100 the quota of four to be released.
I understand.
The boys' decision was made that I will be one of them in going. I went to Budapest, discussed with the leadership there.
And they said, yes. Do you want me to go for the qualities that I possess of the languages I possess that I may be in a
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

need for a later date? We don't know what's going to happen. And they are predicting-- they feel that I should go.
This was 1942?
That's 1942, close to the end of 1942. Or it's late fall, in the beginning of fall, let's put it this way. I came home. And I
said, I'm going to start packing. I'm going to leave for Palestine. And rumors had it that there was only four. And
everybody wanted to get out.
My mother-- we sit down one evening. And my mother says to me, are you fair? I looked at her. And I says, Mother,
what do you mean? And she says to me-- these are the words what she said. After all, she says-- I used to call me the
macher, my macher. My mother used to call me-- here is my macher.
The big man.
Yeah. So after all, you're the big macher. She says, you're the guy who is running around all over the place. And you're
the-- why do you-- it will look like you're taking for yourself. How about giving it to somebody else? After all, you're a
shtetl leader. So it doesn't look good. It will look like you were taking yourself.
So I says, how about if I give it to my sister, to my younger sister, and let her go? She says, no, you give it to somebody
else. At the time, I didn't click, but later on, the downtime, in-- later on in years, that she didn't want us to leave. We
wanted to stick together.
Sure. Keep the family together.
So anyhow. But the paradox of it is the ones who left, they all survived. And they are in Israel till this day. So I gave it
away to somebody else and the four of them. And they left for Israel, for then, at the time, Palestine.
I see. So then what happened to you?
Then I stayed home. I had to go around and make every day problems to accumulating-- to see for the everyday daily
survival.
Sure.
And my headache was not only for myself already. Because there were a lot of older people who their kids got stuck all
over the world in different places. And they could not have any-- so in other words, we had to get busy to help
everybody in the way we could.
In '43, things starting to go worse.
You were still-We're still home.
--19 years-- 18-19 years old. You had a lot of responsibility.
Yes. I still-- responsibilities. Yes. In other words, I realized, I had to grow up overnight, simple fact. Then we were
taken to the ghettos. In 1943, we have been taken to ghettos.
All right. Now, tell me, the ghettos-- you mean, in your own town?
Let me explain what a ghetto is. Ghetto is-- of course, Germans came in already, occupied the entire section, the
Carpathian link. And it was under occupation with the Germans, but also Hungarians. The first-- right away, the first
thing what they did is, in creating the ghetto, is they going in a section of the town.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Mostly, they looked the sections where Jews were concentrated. And they clean out the all surrounding area, all of the
houses. If any Gentiles, they move them out and they give them another house, of a Jewish home or a Jewish house
somewhere else.
Then they bring in all the Jews from that hometown, from the whole town, to that particular designated area. And they
seal it off. And this is-- we moved in. We had to move in. We were five in our family-- I mean, let's see-- there was one
boy, four-- we were six in the family. And so we had one room.
Well, there were four children-- five children-Five children.
--and your parents.
My parents.
So there were seven.
Yeah.
Your mother, and father, and the seven children.
Yes, seven. Yeah, four girls.
I mean, and the five children-- four girls and you.
But also, my grandmother was with us.
So that there were eight.
Eight people. We had to move in-- eight of us had to move into a-- to a one room.
In a home.
In a house. Yeah, it's a house.
But you had one room was your living quarters.
And we got one room. And another room was another family, and a third room a third family.
I understand.
We were about four or five families together.
Were these people you knew?
People from-- yes, from-Jewish people from your community, right.
--Jewish people from the community, from the town, what we knew very well. And of course, we were-- the way it was
conducted is you come in, say, hey, you pack tomorrow morning. You are leaving. You can take with you this, take
blankets, get a little bit food to last you for a couple of days. You cannot take your jewelry. You cannot take this, fancy
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

stuff, coats, and that, just regular clothing. And that's the way it happened.

Well, how did you-- what difficulties did you encounter there? Who supplied you with food in the ghetto?
At that time, we are moving in the-- we are just moving in in the ghetto. And we took some food with us. And by being
in the ghetto, I remember that we managed to get a meeting together. And we decided, we are going to take the wagons,
horse and buggy wagons. And we'll go from house to house. And whatever food is left in the Jewish families, we'll put
it in that wagon. And we'll bring it in in the ghetto. And this is-Oh, you were permitted to go out during the day to do this?
Yes. This is still the same process as is moving out. We had three, four days to do that. In the period of those three, four
days, this is what we did. So we went out. And we brought from every house. We went in in every house. What we
found food, we put it in-- butter, oil, cheese, cream cheese, flour, whatever-- sugar, whatever we found, we put
everything together. We brought it in the ghetto. And then we had another group who was dividing it, giving out. Any
family who came and needed food right away was given.
Right, right, sort of community living.
Yes. And-How long---what I didn't know at the time was that the Germans observed who are top machers who are doing things, and who
were leading, and so on. I didn't know that they already knew who I am, and what I'm doing, and they observed me.
After being in the ghetto, and every settled down a little bit, quieted down, and everybody was already-- two days later,
one of the Jewish Judenrat, so to speak, came in. And he says, Larry-- my Jewish name was Leibe. He says, Leibe, this
is the chief of the Gestapo. And the chief-- there was a big chief. He was-- he had a half a dozen men with him. He
wants to talk to you.
It was fine. So I came in and took my hat off. So he says to me now, first question is do you speak German? So I says, a
little bit. And he says, OK. He says, I'm going to test you and see how little bit you speak.
And he's asking me some questions, minor questions-- how many wagons of food did you brought in? And did you got
all of it out? And still-- do you think there's still some left? Or can you still get a wagon and the horses together and get
it? That kind of good approach. And then he says, how many boys do you have working with you? I was naive. I didn't
know what he is shooting-Why he's asking this.
--what he is shooting for. So I gave him all the answers. And he says, well, your German is pretty good. So he says, go
ahead and do what you have to do. Bring in more food and all of that. That lasted for approximately a good week.
Afterwards, the week is over, my father knew another guy, a non-Jew who was working for the Germans, was a
Hungarian policeman. But my father used to give him money, buy him drinks-- not years back from before.
So he was standing guard. They are walking around. So my father calls him over and says, hey, he says, be a pal. Let me
cash in a little bit on you after all those years. Look, he says, see what you can find out and let me know. Says OK. And
one day, he comes over to my father. And he says, listen, there is an order-- the Germans them self could not come in
the camp to arrest or take anybody.
The ghetto, you mean?
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Right. You had to have the Hungarians to come in. He says to me that listen, there is an order to take in your son and the
rest of the boys, the names of another bunch of teenagers, a whole bunch of young people.
My father heard this. He got busy. Till this day, I don't know how he managed. But I got-- we used to call it a [NONENGLISH], which means-- it's a-- from the army, they call you. In other words, you have been recruited to the army-I understand.
--to the Hungarian Army. And I had a piece of paper by saying that I have been recruited by the Hungarian Army to
report here, and here, and here at that and that day-A call-up
--to call up to duty.
Right, call to duty, right.
Well, if you had this, there was nobody anything can do. You just have to go out, and pack, and leave.
Right. So that's how you stayed out of their hands that time. OK.
Yeah. But my call was two weeks. I still had two weeks' time.
Well, was this a legitimate thing?
A legitimate. That's everything.
Oh, I thought he maybe paid somebody.
Oh, yeah, he had to pay it. But it was legitimate.
Oh, but it was legitimate, whether you should go into the army then go to the Germans. OK.
Right. That was legitimate, yes. But it was bribery. But it was legitimate. But it was two weeks later. I still had two
weeks' time. So in order-- we tried to figure out for them what to do in those two weeks. Well, rumors got to us that
there are still some papers available in Budapest. See, Budapest was not ghetto yet. We don't know at the time. We don't
know what's going on. But we don't-Papers for what? For Palestine, you mean?
Not for Palestine, but to other countries, to be able to get away.
I see.
That was the time that we didn't know what's happening. So since I didn't look Jewish, I could get away with it. And not
looking like a Jew, I got dressed up, and I went to Budapest. I met with my people who I knew from before. And they
all said, it's trouble everywhere. And they are expecting somebody to arrive from Palestine pretty soon, who will instruct
what to do. And therefore, nothing I can do.
The only thing they can help me is they have two pieces of paper. And they don't know how much it will work and how
much not that somebody will be able to go to Romania, to escape, that he will be able to cross the border and go into
Romania.
You preferred-- you didn't really want to go to the Hungarian Army.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

I'm still home there. I still have this. So they didn't know what to tell me. They said, we do the best we can. Try and stay
in touch. And let's see what happens. Because we could not use telephones. We could have no communications. It had
to-- excuse me. It had to be on a personal level.
So nothing accomplishing, I took those two pieces of paper. They were like passports, two pieces of passport. I came
home. And we had a meeting, who should be the two to go. So I wanted one of them to be my sister. All the thing we
had to do is to put the picture on it. And I had a little piece of rubber to give it a stamp to make it-Official.
--have official. Anything else was-- you know. So they said, no, we'll send another couple. There was a young couple
who just got married a couple of years ago. And we decided for them to go. And we gave it to them. And they went to
Romania. And they are still today in Palestine. They survived.
Time came and I had to go to the army. I had to leave. And here is the saddest moment of my life. I kissed my parents
and my sisters goodbye. I said, I'll be back soon. And I'll be watching you. And that's the last time I ever-Saw them.
--see them.
So you went into the army then?
I went into the army.
Where did you go?
I went called a city Nagybánya.
How far was that from home?
From home, that was, oh, about four or five hours' ride on a train. And there-- now, I'm leaving home. I don't know
anything what's going on home. I'm different.
No communication.
No communications whatsoever.
No letters, nothing.
I left home. And I don't know anything till after the war, I'm finding out details from my sister.
I understand.
But till then, I don't know.
But let's talk about-- you went to the army. Now, how long did you stay in the army?
Here is a different-- when you say army, it's a different concept. You got to understand, here, with the army, I happened
to have that we had a colonel who was a very good guy, who later became one of those Righteous-Gentiles.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

--Gentiles. His son is writing a book right now in Budapest. And my name will play a part.
What is this man's name, the colonel?
Gee.
Or his son's name, do you recall?
He was called Colonel Kelety. Kelety. Kelety.
Calady.
Kelety, yeah.
Can you spell it?
K-E-L-E-T-Y.
Oh, OK.
And he's going display. He's playing a-- he's writing-- his son is putting together a book. He was here in America not too
long ago. And he was there and back. And I have a special story with him. And he dedicated quite a little bit to that.
How wonderful. Now, tell me. So Colonel Kelety was helpful to the Jewish
To Jewish-- he---the Jewish people in the army.
--he was the one who issued those papers. But he didn't know that in between, the between-goers made money out of
that.
Right. I see.
So in other words, he was the one who put the signature on it. And he is the one who was in-To call you to the army.
To come in to be under his regiment, in other words, under his.
Sure, I understand.
So we came in there. I reported. I was taken in, registered, everything, issued certain military things-- a blanket and
other few little things.
Uniform, yeah.
No uniform, just on our own-- we went in our own clothes.
Your own clothing, OK.
Yes. And we just received-- there was a armband with a stamp in it from the Hungarian Army. and this yellow band,
yellow armband, and this is what we wore.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

This tells that you're a member of the army.

Yes. Now, as long as I'm in the armband, let me go back to the four-- I didn't talk about it. It was in the ghetto, when we
came in the ghetto, that everybody had to wear the yellow star. And we had to-- should stop?
No, go ahead.
We had the yellow star. We had to wear the yellow star, and of course, a strict curfew. You couldn't go out from-Sure, the curfew, right.
Right, and all the restrictions that go with it. Now, back to the army. I was been in there for about four or five days. We
received word that the local Jewish people have been taken to the ghettos. In other words, they created the same ghetto
that we had in our town hometown, we created here.
In order to know what's going on, we right away-- some of the guys there knew me. And we felt that something is going
to happen, some different organization because of the Zionist movement that I used to be. I used to organize and all that.
Right away, I organized a small group of guys who had-- a hard core of guys around me.
Had what?
A hard core of guys.
Hard core. Oh, to do what?
As we will keep going.
All right. Well, but we have-Whatever is going needed, whatever will be needed to do.
I see. But you're in the army. Right.
Yes. And we are in the army.
All right. Let's take a little break now. And we'll come back and finish this interesting story.
OK.
All right?
All right.

This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

