https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

OK, Larry. We're back. And we'll start again now I should say with your experiences in Dachau.
Yeah, OK. Dachau it was already a more famous camp. It was-It was a what camp?
Famous.
Oh, famous.
I didn't understand.
More famous camp. It was kept more and orderly. There used to come international visits from the Red Cross and from
so. So therefore, it was one of the top-notch camps. And it was kept.
How lucky you were there, right?
You ain't kidding. That was compared with what's been going on in other places, we were real lucky.
Can you imagine?
So, but the luck didn't last that long. We stayed there for three days, four days. And then we were shipped from there
about a half a day's ride in a car, in a train near Landsberg called Lager Seven.
Near Landsberg. Landsberg is in what country?
In Germany. That was in Germany, not far from Dachau.
This was another work camp you were being sent to.
Work camp, another lager, yes.
The same people that you were with Warsaw.
In the Warsaw ghetto.
And who had made the march with you? Whoever was left.
Yes, the same group that was left from the Warsaw ghetto from there.
The 2,000 of you or whatever.
Right. And the first one who were there before I arrived, and the ones who came with me.
Whatever-- they needed a certain number of workers?
Yes, right.
OK.
So we came back. They took us. We arrived in Landsberg. Landsberg was in the ground, so to speak, was underground.
It was built like the Eskimos built their houses from ice, the same way.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

Igloos.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Yes, the same way was built, but made with-Earth.
Earth and the top and green grass on it. And we lived inside. Inside there was plain wood and straw, and you had a
blanket, and that's it.
Landsberg was how far from what big city? Do you know, have any idea?
Landsberg in itself is a big center point.
It's a big city in Germany. Today it's still in existence?
It still is, right.
I see.
That's number one.
And Landsberg, Hitler himself was locked in, in that jail.
I see.
Not far from the Landsberg jail. So I had the privilege of being close to Hitler's own history.
OK.
Being there for about five or six weeks, typhus broke out. So they quarantined the whole camp. Nobody could go in and
nobody could go out.
Do you have any idea how many thousands were in this lager?
It's in the thousands. I have no-- I have no idea of the exact figure.
You mean nobody could go out of his little hut?
No, out of our huts, you could go out.
To work.
The camp, you couldn't-Couldn't leave to go to work.
No. It was sealed off completely with them, that whoever will survive will survive. Whoever will die will die. But after
three days, they decided to take a gamble. And whoever was still in good shape, they took him out and see maybe they
can use him somewhere to work. So I still was good shape. They took me out from there and took me to a camp not far
from there. We walked, about three hours walk called Kaufering, lager vier. That's called means the same camp like
there was Landsberg, number seven. Not far from there was a little village called Kaufering. And that was called
number camp number seven.
OK.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

But it still belonged to the same area.
I see.
So, and from there, we went to work to the baustelle Holzmann. Holzmann is a German organization. A baustelle, it's a
construction company that exists till this day.
I see. So what kind of work were you doing?
So we went to work there. We worked there at night. For construction, building underground airports, and stuff like that,
construction work.
OK.
The food was lousy, and we deteriorated it all of us. And there one day, my father couldn't go to work anymore. My
uncle, and all of that. This particular older generation couldn't take it anymore. And they started to deteriorate.
Did you have any idea about how old your father was at that time?
At the time, 48.
But like an old man.
Completely broken, completely old. And he started to deteriorate, and deteriorate, water in their knees, water in their
feet. And one day, they came in and took him away. And that-That was the last saw your father?
One morning, I just said, I'll see you tonight when I come back. I left him in the camp. I went to work. I came back
home, and he was gone, not only him all of them, never to be seen, never to be heard. And I don't know how he died or
where he died, and what he died. But I assumed that he was taken from there close to Dachau. And he was thrown in
and he died somewhere in Dachau in the gas chamber or something like that.
Were you-- now we are in lager seven. I mean lager four. The Americans are approaching. That the-You've heard rumors.
Rumors, we already know that D-day took place a long time ago.
And this was already then.
That's already '44, close to-- this is already not '44, this is already '45. That's already early spring, late, late winter of '45.
OK. Right.
We cannot go anymore to work. I had typhus. The camp was closed off, no medication, no medicine. I have typhus. But
I remember the doctor telling me, if you get ever get sick there is one thing what you should do, try not to make dirt
under yourself. Stay clean as much as you can.
God knows I crawled on my feet. I did everything. And the only thing I will forever never forget is I tried to crawl out
of my block, get out, and I crawled to the gate. And I wanted to get out of the gate. And on the other side of the gate,
there was a German, two German guards, SS. And one had his rifle like this to my head. And he says to me, push the
door. If I push the door he should be able to kill me. So the other guard came over to him and said, [GERMAN], leave
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

him alone. He says, exhaustion, fatigue. He's already finished anyhow. Save yourself.
He was a little bit more-- a little bit more humane.

Yeah, he says, leave him. He is dead anyhow. So save yourself the bullet. Just leave him alone. So and I broke down
there, and I fall down there. I don't know for how long I remained there. But I mean remained there and I lined up being
back in my barrack, to be shortly I made it in 28 days. I had no food, no nothing, I survived without medication, or
without everything.
I'm here, thank God.
What do you get with this? What do you mean 28 days? Until-28 days I was out of food, out of water.
Oh, I see.
Out of medication.
OK.
With being the way I was, high fever.
Then actually you were liberated at that point? Then one morning we woke up, and they said they are going to evacuate
us again. We had to go out of the barracks. We got out of the barracks.
As sick as you were?
As sick as we were, we just schlepped on our feet, and all that. We have been sitting there outside and waiting. Finally,
we helped each other to crawl in the trains. And they were, again, taking us God knows where. I don't know where they
were taking us from one place to the other. The Air Force came in, the American Air Force. They shot the locomotive
out. They shot the locomotive out. So the train couldn't move. And we were stuck on the track.
And as we were stuck on the track, and they started to bomb the track, I only remember that somehow I jumped over
from the inside out. It was like a coal, they're transporting coal, and that kind of-It was open. It was open on the top.
On the top.
I see.
Yes. That kind of-So you were able to jump over.
Right, I jumped over, and I fall down, and I opened up the door. And we opened it up so the inside started to escape.
And the ones that started to run away, all of a sudden started to be shot at. We didn't know from where then I looked
around, and I realized what happened we came in a two way lane. And next to us stopped an army train loaded with
soldiers and with flags, with fire, you know anti-aircraft fire and all of. That. And they thought that if-The German army?
Yes, the trains will come and see that we are who we are, they we will not bomb them, and then they will be able to
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

retaliate and shoot. So they used us as an escape.
Almost like a hostage.

A hostage, right. But as soon I realized what happened, and I told some of my boys, I still had original from we started
out eight from my hardcore, you remember in the beginning.
Right, but they were-There were three left.
Only three.
Together three. Myself, and two more. There were three left. The other ones got killed, died, and that's it. Typhus took
some of them. And were only three left. We got together. I don't want to go in again on something on that because. It
will sound like I'm always the hero and always something can happen, and I'm always doing something for somebody
else. A girl gets shot.
OK, so the three of you were left. And did you-And some of them got away.
You got away, the three of you and others.
We got away, we run away in the forest. We run away. There was a little forest we got in. And it poured and rained
outside. And we stayed there. We found some ammunition guns that the German , army the soldiers threw away from
themselves, and you know. And finally the next day in the morning we went in a little small village called
Schwabhausen, and there we seen the American army. We were liberated.
As soon as we saw the Americans, the first thing the said to us, sit down and stay here.
You were still in this prison clothing.
Prison clothing, all that, all walking like-- they recognized it right away who we are.
OK. Well you had to be terrible.
Oh, yeah. Well I weighed-- what did I weigh? 38 kilos. What does it mean 38, kilos is what? About two kilos to a pound
I think, Yeah so about 20 pounds or 25 pounds, complete skin and bone. I just crawled you could see everything on me.
Just like you see it in the picture, when you see. That's exactly the way I looked.
Did you think that you would survive?
No, I didn't believe it.
What gave you strength and hope?
Well, the strength, like I said, you remember in the beginning I said that kept me. And I said, nothing is going nothing's
going to break me. I'm going to survive no matter what under any kind of circumstances. And they got me into the
hospital.
Wonderful, wonderful.
And at the hospital-This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Hospital there, an American Hospital in Germany?
Yes, an army hospital. They took us in. The first thing they cleaned us, of course, and they checked us out. And the first,
the second meal is a story to be seen, or be told in itself. And in the way by knowing that the food is here, and even
knowing the food will be served, and when the nurses came in and served the bed here for the guy, that the guy on the
end of the bed jumped out and ran over here, and grabbed the food.
Afraid that he wouldn't get his share.
A raid, like a raid. This is when I broke down. This is when I cried. And I had a 50, the only-- well, 50 years take or
give a little bit older, the only older guy who survived with us at this point, he was six years in the camps. And he
survived. And he was the only one till then.
This was all-And we both-- this is already after the break.
1945.
That's in 1945.
This is when?
May, in May.
May, all right. And you're in the hospital.
Yes that's May whatever. Yeah that's in May, right in month of May. We are in the hospital. We are liberated.
And how old at this time, you're almost-- you're 20 years old.
I'm already now 20 years old.
Right, OK.
Yeah, it's one month before-And you've lived a lifetime. Right?
That's one month before my 20th birthday. I was born in June. June is my birthday, so was one month before my 20th
birthday. And he is crying and I'm crying. We are happy, but yet what he says, look what he made out of us. The food is
here already. We are liberated. We are still like animals. And I woke up the next morning sleeping next to him. I want to
call him, and I see his laying with his hand down. So I thought maybe he feels. The man died. He had a heart attack.
The doctor told me.
How old was this man? Your age, young man.
He was in his close to 50.
Oh, I see.
He was the only older guy. I'm young for my age. The doctor told me he died of a heart attack because he says the
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

concept of being free after six years.
Yes.
That's-Just couldn't take it.
Couldn't take it, and he died.

OK, then you're liberated. Now, where did you go? How long did you stay in the hospital? How long did it take you to
recuperate?
I stayed in the hospital for about a month's time. In June, they transported us back to Czechoslovakia. They asked who
wants to go back. Of course, the war is over. Czechoslovakia is Czechoslovakia. I went back to Czechoslovakia.
You went home to look-- try to find family.
I'm not home yet. I'm in-- I'm in Prague. And in Prague I met girls who came from Germany, from my hometown, and
they told me that my sister is alive and she is in Bergen-Belsen in the British zone, the British occupation. And she is
there.
She's been liberated.
Right, and she is there and that she is alive. So now, I know my sister is alive. This is one sister of four.
Four, and the rest of them I didn't even count. I haven't counted on her either, but somehow she managed. Because she
was already 14 years old.
And the other ones were younger?
One younger.
Were you the oldest in your family, Larry?
I was the oldest in the family.
I see. OK.
I'm in Czechoslovakia. I meet with my boys. I found from the two boys who survived with me, we are three from our
original gang of 16, four more is available. And one more we found later on another one. We are becoming again a
group of eight. Half of us survived.
We decide we are going to go home and take a look what's going on at home. So of us say they don't want to go. I
decided I'm going to go just for one more time. I went. I wish I would be a poet or a writer to describe the feelings, and
how it was, and what it just went through, village after village, small town after small town, empty. No Jewish life, no
death. No houses destroyed, empty. You know, like nature takes his tool on emptiness, and all of that grass growing
everywhere, no nothing.
It's '45 fall. I leave home. I'm on my way to Budapest. Now, you will be able to understand on the beginning what I
wasn't able to say, because it didn't work out as now you will understand.
OK.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Here-So you went to Budapest.

It's '45. In Budapest I meet with Joel Brand. This is the same Joel Brand that dealt with Eichmann before. I saw
Eichmann in 1943. But I didn't know who he is at the time.
Where did you see him?
In Budapest.
Oh before the-- this was before?
Before the arrest, right? To me, we saw. I didn't know his name. I saw an SS man, but an officer, a German SS officer. I
didn't know who he is. I didn't know what it meant. Eichmann didn't mean nothing to me at the time.
Sure.
Now it meant everything already. We knew already, and Joel Brand.
You mean in 1945 you knew already?
Oh, yes. Sure. We had a long talk with Joel Brand. And Joel Brand told me then, and he says someday we will be in
Israel. Israel will be liberated. And we'll be able to talk. Right now, our main objective is to get, to create the state of
Israel.
OK. So this is from Budapest. Then where did you go?
In Budapest, there were transports leaving for Italy and back to Germany. I decided my first priority is to go back and
see my sister. She doesn't know that I'm alive but I do know about her So you're going to I wrote a letter here to
America to my uncle from Germany from the hospital. There was a doctor, a Jewish doctor who was in the army who
came to visit. I don't this. This is I'm finding out later.
He says, he asked if anybody has family in America. And I said yes, I have an uncle by the name of Janowitz, and he
lives in Cleveland, Ohio. That's all I know. So he took the name. He took the address. He came back to the States. He
looked up at the telephone. He found my uncle, the address, he called him up. Later, years later, my uncle tells me he
gets a call on a Saturday night.
The man on the other line introduces himself as Rabbi so and so. And he says, I have a message for you by the name of
Leibi Hersch. And he is your sister's son, Leah. The son. That he is a survivor. He is the only thing that he knows he is
alive. He is going to go home to look around. He doesn't know who survived or who didn't. But my sister already did the
same thing with somebody else. And he already knew. He already was in correspondence with my sister. But I don't
know all of that.
OK. Now I'm leaving Budapest. I'm on my way to Prague. In Prague, I meet one of my friends.
How do you get to these different places?
Just by train. Jump on a train and go.
Oh, were there trains were running at that time?
Running trains, yeah loaded to top.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Everybody's running around.
Everybody's running around.
Yeah, OK.

I jump on a train take Budapest. I ate breakfast here, supper I already had in a different country, if I had supper. But I
had a piece of bread what you could put together.
Yeah.
In Prague, I meet one of the boys who went in '42 and in '43 for Aliyah to Palestine. He is with the Jewish Bricha back.
He came back. He says, Larry, big hug, you know. I got a job for you. For me? Come with me. He took me away. I
became a member of the Irgun right there and then. That was the top. And I started to work for the Irgun from there.
There or you went to Israel?
With the Bricha. First, my job was, because the fact that I spoke all those languages, is I used to bring transport let's say
to smuggle them out between the Hungarian border to Austria, from the Polish border to Austria, from Czechoslovakia
to Austria, or to Germany, all dependent on what it was.
So how many years did you do that?
I worked in that from '45 till '47.
Two years.
In the beginning of '47 I left for Palestine. I became active.
How did you make that trip? On what you called Aliyah Bet, which is called Aliyah Bet is the secret, the-Well, I know. But did you travel by train? Did you travel by ship?
No, no, no, by ship. By ship.
You went in the Mediterranean.
Mediterranean, from Italy, yes.
So you had to go down. Oh, you were in Italy at that time. OK, fine.
From Italy, and from Italy we went to on a little boat.
So how long did that take?
It take me 10 days.
That's all.
Yes. I was in Israel, in Palestine. I was active in different things with the Irgun. And with eight months later, rumors
already that the state of Israel will be created. It's just a matter of time.
The United Nations voted for it, and all of that activity going on. So it was already a fact that the state of Israel, just a
matter of time. But in the meantime, somehow the British got hold of my picture in Germany. And they knew who I
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

was. So the decision was made instead of them to get hold of me, they have been looking for me. I had to leave once
more Palestine. So I was smuggled out on a boat. I had to walk in. I was put in a-- between oranges and grapefruit.
Yes. And put in a hole.
To go where?
And I went, the best way for me was not to go anywhere else, just to go direct to the British. So I went from Palestine to
Cyprus.
All right. And let me just interrupt you for a minute.
Direct to the British in their own mouth.
You went back. You told me that you actually before you got involved in this, you went back. It was your choice to go
back to Germany to look for your sister.
I went back to Germany.
Did you find her?
Oh, yes. I found my sister.
And then you said goodbye. I'm going to go.
I said to my sister, yeah, I had things to do, as long as I-- she knew that I'm alive, and she knew that I'm alive.
OK. And-She was probably in a displaced persons camp or something at the time.
Yes, she was in a DP camp. And she left to America in 1947.
I see. She came to America.
You had no more contact with her at that point.
Just writing, but when I was in Palestine. I didn't write her anything, we didn't. No contact at all. My uncle once in a
while he used to drop a letter. But I didn't want them to send me anything. Because for give away.
Right, subversive. Right.
Then I was smuggled out. I went to Cyprus on a boat. And from the same boat, I went back all the way to France. And
from France, I was taken back to Germany. So I left in 1947. Sometimes it would be by the end of May, I left in '47. By
February of '48, I was back in Germany.
OK, now let's just skip over some of these years. And tell us when you came to this country. When did you come to
America-I came to America in '56.
--or to the US or to Cleveland?
Cleveland, I came in 1956. After that eight year period then, what did you do? You were working for the Irgun all this
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

time?

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

No, no, no. The Irgun dissolved in 1948 after the establishment of the State of Israel. When I was in Germany and in
'48, at the beginning of '48, I was active with the Irgun doing different things at different places. In '48, I received the
standard order to report back, coming back to Israel, which if you remember the story with the boat Altalena. That boat
came and was in confrontation with Ben-Gurion, and with the army at the time.
So I came back on the Altalena, and after there, we were ending to the army. I joined the army.
You were in the Israeli army.
The Israeli army, and stayed there. I stayed in the Israeli army for eight years, till the 1956 war.
Oh, the Six-Day War.
In '56.
Was that the Six-Day War?
No, no, '67 was the Six-Day War. '56 was another thing.
All right.
Excuse me. After the '56 war, I came to America.
OK.
In America-How did you come here? I came to my sister who was here already. She was married.
Did she-- did you need help to come here at that time?
Oh, yes, well but no, no organization or anything of this nature, no help. It came from my own family, from my-I see.
No-No religious organization-No religious organization.
--welcomed you or anything. Because you had family here already.
Yes.
OK, it was your sister.
She was here already too by my uncle. She came to my uncle. My uncle took her out and all. He paid for her.
This was this Mr. Janowitz who lived in Cleveland.
Yes. And he saw that she got here.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

Right. He took her our.
I see. And she stayed in their house. And they just took her in one of their own daughters.
So you came here in '56. At that time, so you were not married then, you said.
No, at that time I wasn't married. I married. I met my wife here in Cleveland.
Did you live with your uncle and your sister when you came?
Yes, I stayed with my uncle. First, I stayed with my sister for a few days, and then I moved in with my uncle because all
of their children were gone. And they had a big house. So I moved in there for the first three months. And then after I
found work, I moved out of there on my own.
I see. In general, did people want to learn about what you had gone through?
No.
Nobody was really interested.
Nobody was interested. In two ways, I think it's a two-way street. First we were not reluctant to talk.
You mean you were reluctant.
Reluctant to talk.
You were reluctant to talk.
Reluctant to talk with strangers.
Of course.
And the most talking came between ourselves, all kinds of things between ourselves.
You mean you with your sister?
What about these friends?
Between us.
Friends from home came that you knew too.
Right, yes. Fellow survivors.
Why did you decide to leave Israel?
Well, it was Israel, I left Israel because first of all, I had no family there.
I see. You had this sister naturally there is this-- this tie.
And my sister somehow, she says she felt-She wanted somebody.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

She wanted me to be.
I can understand.
So and I felt empty in Israel at holidays and all that. OK, I used to have friends and all of that. But still my sister is
family.
Family is family, right. Right. When you came to Cleveland then, did you join a synagogue?
Yes, I joined at the time the Marmarosher Jewish Temple, which was on Lancashire.
That was a Hungarian congregation.
Yes, Hungarian congregation, and till this-Why did you join?
What, the temple? Well, because I felt I'm part of Jewish.
That's right. Your religion meant something, still meant something. Was your rabbi helpful or comforting in any way?
We didn't talk with the rabbi. We didn't talk with anybody on that. All of them was a, so to speak, we were we. The rest
of it is an outside world. In other words, meant nothing to us.
How did you feel as a Jew in the United States?
Well, the one thing that I liked it, and I still do is that first of all, that I'm protected by the Constitution. I can go where I
want, and when I want, and do what I want. Which, of course, to us and to me, especially, I had the same thing in Israel.
But Israel is Israel. It's the Jewish state. Here, it's not the Jewish state. It's different compared to what was there.
Besides, it's America. Everybody has the same rights, and the same thing, as long as it's in the framework of the law and
order, which is for everybody to obey. And nobody's privileged to be different than anybody else.
I liked it. I loved it. It's beautiful. No problem about that.
Can you please tell me how your Holocaust experiences affect you now?
Yes. They do affect me. I see humanity and life from a different perspective. You see, from my perspective America has
developed today, especially in the-- I don't know, if it's only in the Jewish community or is it Jewish, issues or is it
Jewish reflections, or if it is human reflections. I don't know. I have never been anything else but a Jew.
I understand.
So I look at it from the Jewish point of view. And it's not what you know, it's who you know. It not what you stand for
as a man, as a human being. It's rather what you-- and not what you represent, but rather what you possess.
So in other words, it's a different thing.
Well, do you think that comes from your Holocaust experience?
No, no, no, no.
This is what I'm asking you?
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

That's the way I'm looking at from my point of view, the way from my Holocaust experiences, the way I see.
That you mean the way you see people today.
Humanity.
I see. Their values are very different.
Different in a way, in the way they are dividing. And something else, there's a lot of people today.
Are you cynical?
No. That's a fact. Oh, OK.
That to me it's a fact. That it's not. To you or to another, it's an outsider. That's what I'm trying to bring out the insider
and the outsider. You see? You hear a lot about the Holocaust today. And a lot has been written. And probably a lot
more will be written, and a lot of more will be discussed. And there is no expert on the Holocaust. Because to
understand the Holocaust, you've got to look at it only from three point of views. And the one point of view is what kind
of man can do that kind of brutality, or that kind of things to another man. And then what kind of humanity has existed
at that time that permitted itself? Permitted between themselves something like this to happen.
And then you have to look at it from the Jewish point of view. It's not easy to say and to point a finger. But before you
point the finger, look at yourself and say, what have I not contributed? What have I not done? And I let myself to be put
in the position where I was. So what kind of Jewish leadership, what kind of Jewish existence did I have as a Jew at that
particular time that I permitted myself in the framework of what happened to be there?
Did you think you could control it?
Yes, we could.
How could you have controlled it?
Well, plain and simply, by if we had known what's going on, we could have not gone, like resisted.
But you if you had known what was going on, you said that-If you had more information, it would have been a little bit more organized. We could have had the resistance. There
were pockets of resistance. The Warsaw ghetto was resistance.
Of course.
And yes, the Germans paid a price for it. They didn't took it easy. In Budapest, there was resistance. I remember being a
part of a group going out to the streets and we observed, and we saw Germans that the youth, the Hakenkreuz youth,
which the German Hakenkreuz youth who call themselves. We used to go over, I remember it positively, and definitely,
and extremely well. We run over to those kids, and we said, hey, you're Jewish.
They said, what do you mean you're a Jew. I'm not Jewish. I said you're a Jew. We had the same Hakenkreuz on. We
spoke their language. And we said you're Jewish. And then we took them underneath to show that they are not Jew.
They let their pants down and prove that you're not Jewish. And then we beat the hell out of them right there. There
were incidents already killed them right there. So there was all kind of way of resistance.
But when you see in those frameworks and the way things have been, you see, that's the way it happened.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

How often do you talk about the Holocaust?

Well, we mostly between ourselves we talk very often, almost every time.
You have lots of friends.
With the friends, yes.
Survivors.
But it's always we will remain no matter what anybody says, no matter how fancy he sees himself, and nice words or
plain words, we will remain on outside of humanity. We can never be part of the humanity as in the way with this
experience. There is always-You think it's affected your whole.
Absolutely.
And everybody, you think it's affected the way everybody looks at you.
No, no, no, no, no. No, no, not in that sense. And I'm talking all of the survivors.
Yes.
They are all at the same. No matter what they say, one way or the other, that's the way the feelings. And that's the way-You think it's affected your whole social relationship with everybody.
Absolutely. We look at man, of our fellow men from a different angle, from a different point of view, and from a
different-- with all the knowledge.
So you think that survivors are different from other Jews?
Absolutely.
How?
It's their own feeling. It's there inside by paying a commendous humanly impossible to explain in words, the price they
paid in order for their Jewishness. So therefore, you look on it of their being of this Jewishness.
Of course, whatever experiences any of us go through affect our behavior and our thoughts.
I can understand what you're saying.
OK, now you see, it affects if somebody survives an accident, a car accident. Somebody survives an illness.
Sure, it affects their life.
Right. It affects in different things affect us in different ways.
That's true.
And this-- but when we have been abused, for months and years, in everyday life, and in everyday happenings, it's a
story in itself. And it's each one, even individually locks his own, so to speak lock, and looks for his own key to open up
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

that particular.

Larry, do you think there are any reasons for your survival? Do you ever think about that? Is there any reason why you
survived?
I don't know if the reason-- a reason is-- this is a question beyond me. Because they are factors which are beyond my
control in order to be able-You don't think it was just luck?
I can speak only from the human point of view.
No, I'm asking about your point of view, from you.
That's what I mean. Yeah. From mine, as a human being, from my own human being point of view-Right.
Going beyond the mysticism and all of that, from my, it was involved two things, the will of power to survive no matter
what. Age, I was young. I could take the abuse. I could stand it and all of that. And to cope with it. To cope with the
circumstances and to cope with-Your resourcefulness.
And that is the main thing for the survival. And then there is an element of luck. To be, so to speak, what we say today
in our modern terms, of being at the right place in the right time.
Right.
And that made a lot of to do with many survivors.
Sure. Sure. What thoughts do you have now when you remember what you went through?
Stupidity of humanity. Do we ever going to learn? There are so many wise men said so many statements, so many fancy
words. Like the guy who said, if you don't learn from our mistakes, we are bound to regret. I forgot the name of the
philosopher who said that. Now how many times have you learned already throughout history? And how many times
have people, nations, and all regret? Are we learning the consequences from it, till this day? Is man's inhumanity
towards man changed?
We know about it.
Right, right, right.
And in fact, with all those development of new weapons and new stuff, more destructive, more terrible, with more pain
and tears to inflict on each other. And start to find ways to co-exist and to exist and to better for ourselves.
Larry, do you think that survivors have a message that others need to understand?
The survivors have more than a message. And I'm coming to conclusion to believe that a problem is because it's looked
on us like a message. And it's more than a message. It's not a message. It's when I said before in the [? readings. ?] You
remember? On what kind of humanity existed. The same humanity exists today with a little bit more knowledge, and
with a little bit more know-how. But we don't have the power more than to bring it across to you and telling you of what
you, humanity, are capable in doing to yourself.
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

And what good is it? We are bringing it across. We are trying to tell you. Nobody came down from outer space and did
to us what has been done. Only human beings from here who arrived here in the same way we did, who live in the same
way. As here as Jews, as Jewish people, for generations we have been telling the non-Jewish world, look. When we are
sick, we need a doctor and medicine. When we are hungry, we need food. When we are cold, we need clothing and
shelter.
We have beautiful looking women, so do you. We have great athletes. So do you. We have wise men. So do you. We
have stupid men. So do you. So we are not differently than you are. Yet, at every so often, we are getting trodden down
and down to us what has been done throughout history. But it's repeating itself. Every time, every so often, and
humanity does not want to accept. Or they do not want to listen.
Well, in your opinion, what would be an appropriate way to commemorate the memory of those who lost their lives
during the Holocaust years?
The best way to commemorate is first of all, let's not make out of it a Jewish issue. We were Jews, the victims. Let's
make it a human issue.
Well, there were many more than Jews who died during the Holocaust years, right?
Right.
This is what you're telling me.
Right.
Right.
Right. Exactly right, But the difference between the two of them is this. If you were Polish, French, Czech, or whatever
nationality, you lived in your own country. If you obey the rules and the laws of the occupational force, most of the time
they didn't bother you. You could have a chance to survive. But with us, we didn't have this chance. We were Jews. And
as a Jew, you were condemned automatically, no matter what your beliefs are, and in what country you live. You were
automatically condemned. That makes the difference. That's number one.
And number two, it was a Christian world around us what did happen. And let Christianity understand that their
indifference is not the answer. There were many Christian leaders who stood up, no question on that. But they were in a
minority. And their voice wasn't heard. They were not even permitted to listen. So countries where freedom of speech
and freedom of action in everything is free and possible, they should stand up and be heard.
And this is where we survivors have to bring across the message. To understand what it can be done. I heard today from
Jews, my own Jewish people, saying that a religious Jew wouldn't touch it with a 10 foot pole. It's not right.
I didn't understand.
A Jew, religious Jews don't want to talk about the Holocaust.
Why?
Because their belief is that it was God's doing. What God had to do with it? I don't buy that. God didn't create the
Holocaust. It was man's inhumanity towards man. It wasn't God. There are Christians I heard many times Christianity
saying, learn to forgive and to forget. I cannot forget.
Of course not.
And to forgive, it's not a question of me, will I forgive, of me Larry Hersh, as a Jew and as a survivor. The question is,
This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

https://collections.ushmm.org
Contact reference@ushmm.org for further information about this collection

would Jesus the Jew forgive them for their silence? It's not me. What good is the entire Christianity? As when the chips
are down and when his teachings count, they're not there.
I have one, just one further question, Larry. In what ways can those of us who are not survivors relate to those of you
who went through these terrible experiences? Do you expect is there anything that we, as caring and humane people, can
do to relate to you and your experiences?
Yes. The only way a relationship can be is that you understand what we went through, show that you have their human,
show understanding because remember, the majority of us I happen to be lucky that I have a sister. But the majority
without-Without anyone.
--anybody or anything. Be honest and let's look the facts. How many people do you know that have invited a survivor
just to come over and say, hey hello. Come over on a holiday, on a Jewish holiday. Let's spend a Pesach one evening
with us, spend a holiday with us. How many families like this do you know? I don't. And I have never heard of it.
The bridges between the Jewish communities and the survivors, and for this matter even with humanity, has never been
crossed. Now, it's obvious what happened. It happened to him. He is from somewhere else. And this is still this day.
Well, your story has been fascinating. And we much, much appreciate your telling it to us.
More than welcome. I just-Thank you. Thank you so very, very much.
I just hope that what I have told the future generations will be able to draw the consequences from it, and understand
that there is only like we Jews say, there's one God, and there's one humanity. And that's-That's the lesson to be learned.
And that's the must. And if somebody gets-- if any man of any religion, of any race, or of any color is getting depressed
or is suffering depression for no other reason than just for being what he is, humanity must stand up and speak up. And
this is the only way we ever survive as a humanity.
OK. Again, many, many thanks.
You're more than welcome.
It's a beautiful contribution to our archives.
Thank you very much.

This is a verbatim transcript of spoken word generated with 3Play Media.
It is not the primary source, and it may contain errors in spelling or accuracy.

